---
author:         Юрий Сыровецкий
title:          Effects in Programming
tags:           effects
description:    A try to explain effects without monads.
published:      false
---

The [Turing completeness](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_completeness)
property of a programming language states (roughly) that any function in any
Turing complete programming language may be represented as a Turing machine or a
[λ-calculus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lambda_calculus) function.

But what is a **function**?

In mathematics,
a function may be defined in different ways, but generally it obeys 3 laws:

1.  **Totality**:
    function _f_ must give an answer for **any** value of its argument.
2.  **Determinism**:
    function _f_ must give **the same** result each time when it is applied to
    the same argument value.
3.  **No side effects**.
    Actually, mathematics don't even say anything about side effects.
    They were invented by programmers to talk about "functions" doing
    input/output and assigning to memory cells.
    "Real" mathematical function don't do anything such.

It turns so that real world "functions" —
I'm inclined to call them **procedures** —
generally don't obey one or several of these laws.
Rare ones that do, are called **pure** functions.

A violation of any of these laws is an **effect**.

1.  **Partiality effect**:
    if a procedure is not defined for any of values og its argument,
    it doesn't give a result for it.
    As mathematicians say, _a function doesn't return_. What?
    If a function doesn't return, then what happens instead?

    In modern programming languages there are some ways to "not return":

    1.  to sink in an infinite loop,
    2.  to abort the process,
    3.  to throw an exception
        (yes, you can't reason about a throwing procedure as a normal one),
    4.  to jump to another procedure — a (signal) handler.

    _Example:_ division by 0 in a program my

2.  **Indeterminism** effect:
    if a procedure may return different results for the same argument,
